This is a plain-text rendering (extracted with PyMuPDF) of:
  Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
  Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, Shriram Krishnamurthi. arXiv:2111.10412.
  Source PDF: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10412
Layout/figures are approximate; code and table examples are preserved.
========================================================================


===== PAGE 1 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
Kuang-Chen Lua, Ben Greenmana, and Shriram Krishnamurthia
a
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Abstract
Context
Tables are ubiquitous formats for data. Therefore, techniques for writing correct programs over
tables, and debugging incorrect ones, are vital. Our speciﬁc focus in this paper is on rich types that articulate
the properties of tabular operations. We wish to study both their expressive power and diagnostic quality.
Inquiry
There is no “standard library” of table operations. As a result, every paper (and project) is free
to use its own (sub)set of operations. This makes artifacts very diﬃcult to compare, and it can be hard to
tell whether omitted operations were left out by oversight or because they cannot actually be expressed.
Furthermore, virtually no papers discuss the quality of type error feedback.
Approach We combed through several existing languages and libraries to create a “standard library” of table
operations. Each entry is accompanied by a detailed speciﬁcation of its “type,” expressed independent of (and
hence not constrained by) any type language. We also studied and categorized a corpus of (student) program
edits that resulted in table-related errors. We used this to generate a suite of erroneous programs. Finally, we
adapted the concept of a datasheet to facilitate comparisons of diﬀerent implementations.
Knowledge Our benchmark creates a common ground to frame work in this area. Language designers who
claim to support typed programming over tables have a clear suite against which to demonstrate their system’s
expressive power. Our family of errors also gives them a chance to demonstrate the quality of feedback. Re-
searchers who improve one aspect—especially error reporting—without changing the other can demonstrate
their improvement, as can those who engage in trade-oﬀs between the two. The net result should be much
better science in both expressiveness and diagnostics. We also introduce a datasheet format for presenting
this knowledge in a methodical way.
Grounding
We have generated our benchmark from real languages, libraries, and programs, as well as per-
sonal experience conducting and teaching data science. We have drawn on experience in engineering and,
more recently, in data science to generate the datasheet.
Importance
Claims about type support for tabular programming are hard to evaluate. However, tabular
programming is ubiquitous, and the expressive power of type systems keeps growing. Our benchmark and
datasheet can help lead to more orderly science. It also beneﬁts programmers trying to choose a language.
ACM CCS 2012
Software and its engineering →Software notations and tools;
Information systems →Query languages;
Keywords type systems, tabular programming, data science, benchmarking
The Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming
Submitted August 31, 2021
Published
November 15, 2021
doi
10.22152/programming-journal.org/2022/6/8
© Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
This work is licensed under a “CC BY 4.0” license.
In The Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming, vol. 6, no. 2, 2022, article 8; 30 pages.


===== PAGE 2 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
1
Motivation
Tables are a widely-used means of communicating information. They suggest a clean
and useful visual representation, and they save data-processors from parsing. They
are readily understood and created even by children [36]. Thus, it is unsurprising
that a large quantity of data—e.g., government data repositories about everything
from demographics to voting to income—are provided as tables (often as CSV ﬁles).
Furthermore, many datasets are provided in siblings of tables such as spreadsheets
and relational databases.
In turn, many programming languages support tabular programming. Some, like
SQL, are custom languages, but for many programmers, it is convenient (especially
when tables are of moderate size, so that performance is less of a concern) to process
tables from within whatever language they are using to write a larger application, or
with which they are already very comfortable.
Tables are a rich source of typing discipline. Typically, each column of a table is
homogeneous, but the columns can themselves vary in type. There can also be a
large number of columns. This makes the typing of tables interesting. Is it just Table?
That provides no information about values extracted from a table. Is it Table<T>? That
implies all data in the table are homogeneous, which is rarely the case. Is Table a
constructor with a type per column? Given that tables do not have a ﬁxed number of
columns, this requires variable arity for constructors. Columns are usually accessible
by name. They are often also ordered. And so on (section 3).
Owing to this richness and complexity, several authors have created sophisticated
systems to type tables in higher-order, functional programming languages (section 10).
Furthermore, tables oﬀer an opportunity for authors of new, richly-typed languages
to showcase what their language can do. We are especially interested in these typ-
ing schemes because we are currently designing a typed table library for the Pyret
language. If there are known techniques that could meet our needs, we would be
delighted to use them.
Unfortunately, there is a signiﬁcant diﬃculty in performing scientiﬁc comparisons
among table types, which we saw ﬁrst-hand. In Spring 2021, the authors ran a graduate
seminar to study the state of the art in rich type systems to support programming
with tables.¹ Our focus was on both expressiveness and human-factors—the latter
(e.g., error quality) often being the victim of enrichments to the former.
We were left deeply frustrated for two reasons. First, we saw little discussion of
human-factors in most of the papers. Second, and even more notably, it proved very
diﬃcult to compare the many papers we read. There are many operations over tables,
but most papers discussed only a very small, select set of them. Were other operations
left out due to pure oversight, because of space, or because they were beyond the
power of the type system being proposed? Even when operations were present, they
were sometimes in a weaker form than one might wish—leaving the same questions
1 cs.brown.edu/courses/csci2950-x/2021 accessed 2021-08-31
8:2


===== PAGE 3 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
Figure 1
Live View of Type System Designers Approaching Tabular Programming [54]
unanswered. Ultimately, our eﬀorts to summarize the research landscape (section 10)
were curbed by the narrow focus of the papers (informally characterized in ﬁgure 1).
We want to be clear that we do not blame any of these authors. Typing tables is a
large problem. There are many table processing operations to support. Operations
have complex behavior, so their type can be expressed at diﬀerent levels of richness.
Error reporting is another challenge. Each paper has advanced the state of the art by
imposing constraints and focusing on part of the problem, which is a reasonable way
to make progress.
However, we believe it would be healthy for the community to have a ﬁxed reference
point to use as a comparison. Some researchers may be able to show that their systems
can already capture all these constraints. Others may be spurred on to new research
challenges. Authors of new richly-typed languages can validate their advances over
prior work. Researchers who make progress on error reporting can use an objective,
third-party suite to demonstrate their improvements. Finally, programmers can use
this suite as a guide to understand completeness, richness, and diagnostic aid when
choosing languages. Thus, we anticipate salutary outcomes for both the research and
programming communities.
While the benchmark provides axes of standardization, it does not automatically
dictate how results should be reported. Wide variation in reporting is therefore a
risk, and would vastly reduce the value of the benchmark. However, because type
systems and programming languages are engineering media, ideas from other forms of
engineering may help here. We propose adapting the idea of a datasheet to standardize
reporting. In this paper, we introduce a ﬁrst version of such a datasheet (section 8).
2
Benchmark Components and Design
This paper’s contribution is b2t2, the Brown Benchmark for Table Types. The purpose
of the benchmark is to serve as a focal point for research on type systems for tabular
programming. To this end, we have collected a set of table operations that is suﬃcient
8:3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
for many tasks and have annotated these operations with precise constraints for type
systems to strive for. In addition to this central Table api, the benchmark has four
auxiliary components to validate the end-to-end experience of a proposed type system:
1. What Is a Table? (section 3). A deﬁnition of tables. The deﬁnition gives candidate
type systems a common starting point.
2. Example Tables (section 4). A set of example datasets. These are mainly used
to illustrate the behavior of operations in other components of b2t2, but also
concretize some expressiveness challenges.
3. Table api (section 5). An api of tabular operations with detailed type constraints.
The constraints are intentionally writted in English to set goals for type system
designers in a neutral manner.
4. Example Programs (section 6). A set of short programs that use the table operations.
Each program raises speciﬁc typing questions, such as how to iterate over the
numeric columns in a table.
5. Errors (section 7). A set of buggy programs with explanations that describe the
exact bug in the program. The challenge for a type system is to provide accurate,
and ideally actionable, feedback.
To encourage comparisons among implementations of b2t2, the benchmark concludes
with a datasheet template for reporting purposes:
6. Type System Datasheet Template (section 8). A short free-response form that authors
can use to describe their implementation of b2t2.
2.1 Benchmark Source
b2t2 is implemented as a public GitHub repository:
github.com/brownplt/B2T2
Our vision is for the benchmark to serve as a living artifact for the community.
First of all, we encourage type system designers to contribute implementations of the
benchmark. Second, we invite criticism of the benchmark itself. This initial release may
contain implicit assumptions, despite our eﬀorts to weed them out. Similarly, other re-
searchers may propose new elements to enrich the main components—characteristics,
example tables, operations, programs, or errors.
2.2 Benchmark Origins
We have constructed b2t2 drawing on several major tabular programming frameworks:
R (Tidyverse) [19, 66], Python (pandas) [57], Julia [31], LINQ [43], and SQL [17]. We
chose these sources because they are widely regarded as quality data-processing tools
and are used in numerous domains in industry and elsewhere. Thus, they provide us
with a sense of authenticity.
Readers will notice that the frameworks are mostly from “dynamically typed” lan-
guages. This choice is intentional. Starting with a typed library might restrict us to
8:4


===== PAGE 5 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
operations that are only expressible in those type systems. In dynamic languages,
programmers are not hampered by any particular static type system and can more
freely express the behaviors that they ﬁnd convenient.
b2t2 is meant to be a compelling yet moderately-sized challenge for type system
designers. Thus, rather than re-create a full library in the same vein as the inspiring
frameworks, we have taken steps to curate an api. In particular, we have:
1. Been selective in copying operations, focusing on a suﬃcient set of operations to
reveal challenges for type systems. For example, the common operation nlargest is
missing because it can be encoded with two api operations: tsort and head.
2. Limited the set of parameters and options of the ones we do copy. For instance,
b2t2 distills the eight cases of the pandas join operation down to one.
3. Minimized the use of overloading. Instead of including one concat operation that can
append rows or columns depending on a parameter, b2t2 contains two operations:
vcat and hcat. Section 5 explains the minimal overloading that is included.
4. Translated overly-dynamic features. For instance, some of these libraries let pro-
grammers pass expressions in the form of strings. Not only does this depend on an
eval-like feature in the language, it also leaves ambiguous how scope is handled.
We have instead used function parameters, which avoid all these problems.
In addition to the frameworks, b2t2 is inspired by one more, rather diﬀerent, source
of inputs: Pyret, an educational language, as used in the Bootstrap:Data Science [9]
curriculum; and the data-centric [37, 53] collegiate curricula. The use of these curricula
serves as a check on the suﬃciency of our operation choices; it ensures that the Table
api can clearly represent fundamental data-processing tasks.²
2.3 Design Alternatives
Before we present the components of b2t2, we pause to discuss a few signiﬁcant
non-goals of the design:
b2t2 is meant to improve the normal design [63] of type systems. Although (as-
pects of) the benchmark may be useful in other settings—as a reference point
for a new domain-speciﬁc language, as a source of example programs and errors,
etc.—we fully acknowledge that b2t2 is not an appropriate tool to validate radi-
cal [63] category-breaking methods of tabular programming. Section 9 discusses
this limitation in more detail.
On a similar note, b2t2 is a benchmark for expressiveness aspects of a type sys-
tem. It is not concerned with the eﬃciency of operations. Nor does it include
broader approaches to evaluation such as cognitive dimensions [8] and conceptual
design [28].
There are several aspects of the programming experience that b2t2 does not cover.
Most of all, we mention the ergonomics of the programming interface. Today, one
can program using a variety of tools, from structured editors [58] and block-based
2 Full disclosure: We hope to one day design a richly-typed table library for Pyret.
8:5


===== PAGE 6 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
programming [40] to dot-driven metaphors [48] and new modalities [2, 47, 49]. It
has not been clear how to capture these in a technical manner, and some of these
anyway stray quite far aﬁeld from our focus on types. Section 7 brieﬂy returns to
this issue.
3
What Is a Table?
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/WhatIsATable.md
b2t2 begins with a deﬁnition of what we consider to be a table, since the term does
not have complete agreement. We intentionally do not over-specify the deﬁnition to
avoid precluding some clever encoding that we have not envisioned. Rather, we list
those characteristics that we consider essential and highlight key design choices.
3.1 Basic Deﬁnitions
A table has two parts: a schema and a rectangular collection of cells.
A schema is an ordered sequence of column names and corresponding sorts.
– The column names must be distinct (no duplicates).
– The sorts can vary freely.
A header is a sequence of distinct column names (a schema without sorts).
A column name is a string-like ﬁrst-class datatype.
A sort describes the kind of data that a cell may contain.
Common sorts are numbers and strings; uncommon
sorts include images, sequences, and other tables.³
The collection of cells has C ∗R members, where:
– C is the length of the schema;
– R is an arbitrarily-large number of rows; and
– each cell has a unique index (c, r) for 0 ≤c < C and 0 ≤r < R.
The rectangular arrangement has four important consequences:
the rows are ordered, the columns are indexable by schema, all
columns contain exactly R cells, and all rows contain exactly C cells.
A row is an ordered sequence of cells.
A cell is a container for data.
– Cells may be empty.
– The data in cells of column c must match the sort of the c-th element of the
schema.
3 We use the term “sort” to avoid any intuitive constraints that readers might attach to the
term “type”. All types are sorts. If needed, a sort can be more.
8:6


===== PAGE 7 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
3.2 Additional Characteristics
Empty tables, with no cells, may have zero rows and/or zero columns.
Tables can be represented in row-major order, in column-major order, or in any other
way that supports the basic deﬁnitions and the Table api operations. Encodings of
tables that use other abstractions (functions, objects) are quite welcome as well.
For this ﬁrst version of the benchmark, we assume that tables are immutable.
Supporting mutation adds signiﬁcant but largely orthogonal complications: some
systems may need to layer on eﬀect systems [38], and all systems have to manage
aliasing for soundness. Furthermore, many rich type systems are built atop purely-
functional languages. Since one reason to permit mutation is for eﬃciency, a topic
we are explicitly ignoring, this omission does not create problems elsewhere.
Column sorts are not ﬁrst class. Nor do we assume any reﬂective operations on
sorts. Consequently, a program cannot ﬁlter the numeric columns from a table by
inspecting column sorts and the describe/summary functions of R, pandas, and
Julia are inexpressible.
Finally, we ignore input-output: the benchmark does not stipulate how tables are
entered into programs. There may be a variety of mechanisms: typed in verbatim,
loaded from a ﬁle, inserted using a drag-and-drop interface, and so on. We only
expect that there be some way to express table constants like those in section 4.
3.3 Typing Tables
Tables have several features that present challenges for conventional type systems,
especially because table operations can manipulate aspects of a table. We list these
features and their justiﬁcation below:
Columns are heterogeneous. The column sorts in a table schema allow diﬀerent
kinds of data to sit side-by-side. As a basic example, a table may have numbers in its
ﬁrst column and strings in its second. This property is critical to describe existing
datasets, but it does not ﬁt with type systems that require homogeneous collections.
Although programmers can create homogeneity by deﬁning an artiﬁcial “supertype”
that uniﬁes all the actual types contained in a table, this extra step is an imposition
that complicates the boundary between datasets and the programming language.
Cells may be empty. Real-world datasets often lack some entries. It is therefore
critical that tables can express empty cells. We do not mandate a particular choice,
however, because determining how to represent missing values is complex issue
that may vary across languages (table 1), and these debates have an even longer
history in databases [13, 15, 45].
Rows and columns are ordered. Rows are ordered so they can be referenced by index;
we ignore here performance issues such as random access. Columns are ordered so
that users can keep salient columns side-by-side to compare them visually. (Think
about the times you’ve reordered the columns of a spreadsheet to put a pair of
interesting columns beside each other.) Tables must preserve this order at least in
their presentation, whether or not they do in their internal representation.
8:7


===== PAGE 8 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
Table 1
The deﬁning characteristics of our tables and a comparison to related work.
Table
R
pandas
Julia
Tibble
D.Frame
D.Frame
D.Frame
D.Tabled
Rectangular
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordered
 
 
 
 
 
 
Column Names
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distinct Columns
 
 
#
 
 
Row Names
 
 
Implicit Null
?
 
 
 
d Julia DataTables are deprecated as of May 2021.
Column names are ﬁrst-class and manufacturable. There are programs for which it is
eminently useful to compute the names of columns dynamically. The quizScoreFilter
program (section 6) is one example. Of course, such programs are diﬃcult to type
because column names are more than atomic labels. Names must be ﬁrst-class
values and require at least append and split operations to build new columns and
to compare with existing ones.⁴ Other useful operations include pattern-matching
on column names, constructing names from other data (e.g. strings and numbers),
and building sets of names via unions, intersections, and complements.
3.4 Design Alternatives
Table 1 presents a more detailed comparison among b2t2 tables, R tibbles (a modern
reﬁnement of R data frames [66]), and the data frames found in R, pandas, and Julia.
The rows describe notable features. A ﬁlled circle indicates the default presence of
some feature, a blank space indicates an absence, and an open circle indicates a feature
that is conﬁgurable but disabled by default. Because b2t2 tables are a speciﬁcation
rather than an implementation, the row for implicit null uses a third symbol ? to mark
an unspeciﬁed feature.
All designs have column names and impose both a rectangular shape and ordered
rows and columns. Designs disagree on the other features: whether columns must be
distinct, whether rows have names, and whether there is an implicit notion of null to
represent missing data.
Column names are distinct in tables, in tibbles, and in both Julia libraries. The
others allow duplicate columns by default and distinguish these columns by position.
b2t2 requires distinct columns so that table operations can raise a type error if two
columns have the same name. Furthermore, disallowing duplicates may make it
easier for SMT-solver-aided type systems to encode schemas.
4 A language can have ﬁrst-class names that are not manufacturable; e.g., Rascal [35].
8:8


===== PAGE 9 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
Data frames in R and pandas come with row names. These names can enable both a
handy syntax for accessing data and eﬃcient storage strategies. As a case in point,
the F# Deedle library indexes time series data by name rather than position and
allows nearest-neighbor lookups.⁵ b2t2, by contrast, attaches no metadata to rows.
Names must be stored in a column. Incidentally, the tidy data [67] method argues
against row names.
Lastly, the designs are split about whether to encode missing data with an implicit
null or not. Tibbles, R data frames, and Julia data frames each come with a sen-
tinel value that may be appear in any column and propagates through common
operations. Data frames in pandas do not have a uniform treatment of null; certain
Python/pandas types have a null value (e.g. ﬂoat has np.nan), but other types lack
an idiomatic default.⁶ Julia data tables do not support null, and instead require the
use of an Option type. Interestingly these explicit-null data tables were proposed as
an enhancement over Julia data frames, but caused enough breaking changes to
warrant a separate package.⁷ b2t2 leaves this contentious decision to implementors
and merely illustrates situations in which missing data can arise.
4
b2t2: Example Tables
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/ExampleTables.md
The second component of b2t2 is a curated set of tables that highlights the basic
challenges in representing tabular data. These tables also serve as concrete examples
for other parts of the benchmark.
The example tables have the following characteristics:
They are intentionally small. This is because some languages (especially core
languages) may require verbose encodings. There is value to seeing how a small
table looks in any system, to compare the systems’ ergonomics.
They contain values that range over a small, but representative set of sorts: numbers,
booleans, strings, sequences, and sub-tables.
Some tables, like gradebookMissing (ﬁgure 2), contain empty cells; we indicate
these using blank spaces. Each encoding must determine how to handle these.
The tables jellyAnon and jellyNamed are designed to support operations that iterate
over all columns, selecting just those with boolean values.
The tables employees and departments are designed for use in join operations.
8:9


===== PAGE 10 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
name
age
quiz1
quiz2
midterm
quiz3
quiz4
ﬁnal
Bob
12
8
9
77
7
9
87
Alice
17
6
8
88
7
85
Eve
13
9
84
8
8
77
Figure 2
Example table gradebookMissing
4.1 A Sample Table
Figure 2 illustrates the gradebookMissing example table. This gradebook resembles
data that an instructor might keep. Each row corresponds to a student. The ﬁrst few
columns describe the student. The remaining columns contain numeric grades for
diﬀerent assignments. Note that several column names share a common preﬁx, quiz,
which motivates two table-processing tasks: adding a column (to store the results of a
new quiz), and dynamically computing column names (quizScoreSelect in section 6).
Two cells are empty, perhaps because the student was absent on a quiz day.
This example table, like others in b2t2, shows only a header instead of a full
schema. We let implementations choose appropriate sorts for each column. Of course,
implementations are free to require schemas on all table literals.
4.2 Design Notes
The example tables are intended as small illustrations. This narrow focus means that
some potential design goals are not met by this ﬁrst version of the benchmark:
The example tables are not intended to reﬂect principles of good test-case design
(e.g., various edge cases), and are not meant to form a suﬃcient test suite.
These tables also ignore various considerations that arise from programming lan-
guages, mathematics, or speciﬁc domains. Such considerations include number
representations, statistical spread, and serializability.
5
b2t2: Table api
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/TableAPI.md
The third and central component of b2t2 is a functional api that supports common
data-processing tasks. Each entry in this Table api comes with a conventional sort,
a (possibly empty) set of requirements, and a (non-empty) set of guarantees. The
challenge for language designers is to express these constraints with types and code.
5 fslab.org/Deedle/series.html accessed 2021-08-31
6 pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/development/roadmap.html#consistent-missing-
value-handling accessed 2021-08-31
7 github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/issues/1148 accessed 2021-08-31
8:10


===== PAGE 11 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
5.1 Design Goals, Characteristics
As a collection of operations, the goal of the Table api is to express idiomatic
tasks—such as those needed by the curricula noted above (section 2.2)—and to
highlight issues for type system design.
– The api is not meant to be a “core” deﬁnition that chooses a minimal set of
operations. Rather, the focus is to identify the common tasks for which a core
deﬁnition should provide a foundation.
– The api is not meant to serve as a full-ﬂedged table library. For example, it
omits a handy subTable operation because that behavior can be expressed as a
composition of two included operations: selectColumns and selectRows.
The requirements and guarantees that annotate each api operation are meant to
be complete speciﬁcations that describe all properties that a type system might
enforce. Additionally, the require/guarantee speciﬁcations are written in English to
avoid bias toward any particular type system.
The api includes two pivot operations to support the tidy data style of data clean-
ing [67]. Notably, these operations show the importance of ﬁrst-class column names.
They require the insertion of column names into table cells and the projection of
column names from cells into the schema.
None of the api operations depend on ﬁrst-class sorts. Type system designers need
not support reﬂection on types to express the Table api.
5.2 A Sample API Entry
An api entry presents a name, a conventional sort, pre and post conditions, a prose
description, and simple examples. Figure 3 sketches the way that these pieces come
together for one entry.
5.3 api Format and Conventions
A full description of the api would not make for interesting reading. Therefore, we
defer documentation of the full api to the repository link at the top of this section.
We do, however, need to explain a few notational conventions in the api that are not
intended as constraints on language designers.
1. The Table api splits overloaded operations into separate deﬁnitions. The selec-
tRows operation, for example, expects a table and a sequence that describes which
rows to extract. Given a sequence of numbers, it selects the corresponding rows.
Given a sequence that contains one boolean per row, it selects using the indices of
true values in the sequence. Thus, the api has two deﬁnitions:
(overload 1/2) selectRows :: t1:Table * ns:Seq<Number> -> t2:Table
....
(overload 2/2) selectRows :: t1:Table * bs:Seq<Boolean> -> t2:Table
....
8:11


===== PAGE 12 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
addColumn :: t1:Table * c:ColName * vs:Seq<Value> -> t2:Table
Where t1, c, vs, and t2 name the respective parts of the sort.
Constraints
Requires:
c is not in header(t1)
i.e., c must be a fresh column name
length(vs) is equal to nrows(t1)
i.e., the sequence of values must have exactly one element per row
Ensures:
header(t2) is equal to concat(header(t1), [c])
for all c’ in header(t1), schema(t2)[c’] is equal to schema(t1)[c’]
schema(t2)[c] is the sort of elements of vs
nrows(t2) is equal to nrows(t1)
Description
Consumes a column name and a Seq of values and produces a new Table with the
columns of the input Table followed by a column with the given name and values.
Note that the length of vs must equal the length of the Table.
> hairColor = ["brown", "red", "blonde"]
> addColumn(students, "hair-color", hairColor)
name
age
favorite color
hair-color
Bob
12
blue
brown
Alice
17
green
red
Eve
13
red
blonde
Figure 3
Example api entry
Language designers are welcome to handle overloaded operations in any way
makes sense in their language: overloading, distinct operations with related names,
subclasses, or something else.
2. If an operation can fail, then its result sort is Error<T> for some sort T. Implementors
will need to express error terms in an idiomatic manner (perhaps with a tagged
message or an integer ﬂag) and may need to adapt the sorts of such operations.
3. The api uses higher-order functions and other forms of abstraction for conve-
nience. Language designers do not need to support exactly these abstractions as
long as they can express a similar behavior, perhaps through inlining. For example,
buildColumn expects a function that creates a new value from a row, applies this
function to each row, and collects a new table column.
buildColumn :: t1:Table * c:ColName * f:(r:Row -> v:Value) -> t2:Table
A ﬁrst-order language might underapproximate this behavior by proscribing a
pattern that users can follow after they have deﬁned an f function.
The orderBy operation presents a more diﬃcult example because conventional
types give only a vague impression of its behavior. This operation, which is a com-
8:12


===== PAGE 13 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
bination of the lazy OrderBy and ThenBy methods of LINQ Enumerables [16], uses
a sequence of pairs of functions to lexicographically sort a table. Each pair consists
of a getKey function and a compare function such that the result sort of getKey
matches the input sort of the compare at hand. Diﬀerent pairs can employ diﬀer-
ent sorts; e.g., the ﬁrst compare may expect numbers while the second compare
expects strings.
orderBy :: t1:Table
* Seq<Exists K . getKey:(r:Row -> k:K) * compare:(k1:K * k2:K -> Boolean)>
-> t2:Table
One indirect way to express this behavior is to ask for a single getKey function that
returns a tuple and a compare function that lexicographically compares the tuples.
4. We acknowledge that the api is written with rather ﬂexible structural typing in mind.
Consider the sort for buildColumn above; it assumes that the language can collect a
sequence of values into a column and then append that column to widen a table. A
language might not support such operations in a fully-generic manner (perhaps to
enable Hindley–Milner inference), in which case it is acceptable for a language’s
buildColumn to ask for a function that computes an entire row. Other operations
may require analogous details to explain how pieces ﬁt together. For instance, the
sequence argument to orderBy may be easier to express as a heterogeneous tuple.
5.4 Conformance
The overall purpose of the Table api is to set goals for language designers and to
enable comparisons among implementation eﬀorts. An explicit non-goal is to constrain
the form of tabular languages and type systems. To help clarify this non-goal, we list
several points that the api does not mandate.
The Table api is not a core deﬁnition and does not require any particular set of
primitives. An implementation may begin with its own core set of primitives and
use those to express api operations.
Similarly, an implementation need not express each api operation as a standalone
function. Other ideas include: syntactic sugar (macros), methods, and compositions
of other operations. Depending on the choice, an implementation may change the
presentation of api entries to match. For example, methods may require diﬀerent
signatures with one fewer parameter.
Implementations are welcome to choose entirely diﬀerent names for api operations.
Though, to aid comparison, it would be helpful to accompany such changes with a
map to the names in b2t2.
Implementations are also welcome to clarify the sorts for operations. The unas-
suming Table sort almost certainly requires parameters. The generic Seq sort may
need to be specialized, perhaps to vectors in some cases and to tuples in others.
Languages that track nullable values may need more-precise signatures to clarify
which arguments can and cannot be null.
8:13


===== PAGE 14 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
Implementations need not encode all these properties in the pre and post conditions.
Our only requirement is that implementations give an explanation of what is and
is not (or, cannot be) expressed to enable comparisons.
6
b2t2: Example Programs
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/ExamplePrograms.md
b2t2 contains a set of example programs to test how well an implementation of the
Table api supports the development of new typed code. Of particular interest is code
that uses type system features not found in the api. Each example has two parts: a
problem statement and a reference implementation. We list the problem statements
below, with emphasis on the type system challenges that each one presents.
dotProduct This function computes the dot product of two columns in a table (oth-
erwise known as SUMPRODUCT in Excel). A type system should ensure that the
columns are in the table and that the sorts of these columns describe numbers. A
unit checker might also ensure that the numbers have compatible units.
sampleRows This function selects a random sample of a table’s rows. Versions of it
are found in many popular table libraries. We choose to include it here because
it is eﬀectively stateful, which may make it unwieldy or impossible to express in
some languages or type systems. Furthermore, randomness is a particular kind of
state that is glossed over by some type systems and not by others. The centrality of
randomness and sampling in statistical computation makes it important for users
of a programming medium to know how randomness, speciﬁcally, will be handled.
pHackingHomogeneous This function illustrates the principle of p-hacking using a
jellybean dataset inspired by an XKCD cartoon [71]. All columns in the dataset are
boolean-valued.
pHackingHeterogeneous This illustrates the same p-hacking principle, but against an
initial dataset where not all columns are booleans. Thus, a system that can type
the previous example cannot necessarily type this one.
quizScoreFilter This example describes a task that many instructors perform at the
end of a course: compute the average quiz score for each student in a gradebook.
The gradebook contains a mix of numeric and non-numeric ﬁelds, and the numbers
denote both quiz scores and exam scores. To ﬁnd the quizzes, this example iterates
through all column names and ﬁlters the ones that begin with quiz.
quizScoreSelect This example also computes the average quiz scores for a gradebook.
It does so by appending the column name quiz to a few integer suﬃxes and selecting
these computed columns from the gradebook.
groupByRetentive This example categorizes rows of an input table into groups based
on the values present in a key column. The output table includes the key column.
The Table api describes a similar operation; we include it in both places to check
that user-deﬁned functions can express detailed type constraints.
8:14


===== PAGE 15 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
> pHacking =
function(t):
colAcne = getColumn(t, "get acne")
jellyAnon = dropColumns(t, ["get acne"])
for c in header(jellyAnon):
colJB = getColumn(t, c)
p = ﬁsherTest(colAcne, colJB)
if p < 0.05:
println("We found a link between " ++ c ++ " jelly beans and acne (p < 0.05).")
end
end
> pHacking(jellyAnon)
Figure 4
Example program pHackingHomogeneous
groupBySubtractive This example categorizes rows of an input table into groups based
on the values present in a key column. The output table does not include the key
column. Like the previous example, its purpose is to test that user-deﬁned code is
no less expressive than api code.
6.1 A Sample Program
Figure 4 presents the example code for the pHackingHomogeneous example. It deﬁnes a
function named pHacking and invokes this function on one of the b2t2 example tables.
The function body sketches an implementation using api operations, general-purpose
syntax (e.g. loops and conditionals), and one statistical function (ﬁsherTest):
6.2 Conformance
For language implementors, the ground rules for the Table api apply to the example
programs. It is not necessary to express each example strictly as a function, nor to
follow the code line-by-line. Furthermore, we can imagine that some programs cannot
be expressed as written, with a (functional) abstraction, but can be typed if parts of
the code are inlined. It may also be necessary to rewrite the programs to reveal some
information to the type system. An implementation should document such variances.
7
b2t2: Errors
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/Errors.md
For expressive type systems, eﬀective error reporting can be a major challenge. Thus
the ﬁnal component of b2t2 is a suite of erroneous programs with ground-truth
explanations. Each program raises two main questions:
1. Does the type system detect the error?
8:15


===== PAGE 16 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
name
age
favorite color
String
Number
String
12
Bob
blue
17
Alice
green
13
Eve
red
The rows disagree with the schema on the ordering of the ﬁrst two columns.
Figure 5
Malformed table constant swappedColumns
2. If so, how understandable is its explanation?
There is an implicit third question; namely, is the program even expressible? We
address this point below (section 7.2) as part of a larger discussion about how to
compare error feedback across languages.
All the examples are based on actual errors from a log of student programs (sub-
mitted anonymously and voluntarily) in an introductory course at Brown University.
Our presentation distills the student programs to eliminate unnecessary, confusing,
or personally identifying context, rename variables, refer to our sample tables, etc.,
while leaving the essence of the problem unchanged. Every entry implictly makes
assumptions about a student’s intent; in some cases, this is diﬃcult to discern just
from the erroneous program. In all cases, we therefore studied the edits that the
student subsequently made (which typically ended in a corrected version that ran
properly) to understand what they meant to write instead of the erroneous program.
Several examples contain an error due to a malformed table constant. Figure 5
presents one example; the data in this table does not match sorts in its schema. These
“obvious” mistakes are nevertheless common, and their inclusion gives table-aware
languages a chance to showcase their helpful feedback. By contrast, languages that
encode tables with a desugaring may struggle to explain such errors in terms of the
surface syntax. The benchmark includes several constant errors because we anticipate
that a language may give better feedback to some than to others. For example, the
output for an empty cell could be very diﬀerent from that for an empty row. The
latter may give a very simple error whereas the former produces an indecipherable
one (due to desugaring, etc.). Or it could be the other way around, with a smart error
for the empty cell because of contextual heuristics, and an ugly error for the missing
row because there is no context.
7.1 A Sample Error
Each error entry contains ﬁve parts: the names of any example tables (section 3) that
the program refers to, the program’s intent, the buggy program, an explanation of
why the code is erroneous, and a corrected version of the program. Figure 6 presents
an error involving two column names and a boolean operator.
8:16


===== PAGE 17 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
blackAndWhite
Context
jellyAnon
Task
The programmer was asked to build a column that indicates whether “a participant
consumed black jelly beans and white ones.”
A Buggy Program
> eatBlackAndWhite =
function(r):
r["black and white"] == true
end
> buildColumn(jellyAnon, "eat black and white", eatBlackAndWhite)
What Is the Bug?
The logical and appears at a wrong place. The task is asking the programmer to
write r[“black”] and r[“white”], but the buggy program accesses the invalid column
“black and white” instead.
A Corrected Program
> eatBlackAndWhite =
function(r):
r["black"] and r["white"]
end
> buildColumn(jellyAnon, "eat black and white", eatBlackAndWhite)
Figure 6
Example error entry
7.2 Towards Error Evaluation Criteria
Analyzing the quality of feedback is not a science, and requires some interpretation.
Several recent surveys have analyzed the quality of error messages, and thus oﬀer
suggestions of techniques [6, 7, 60]. Human factors research on warning label design
is also relevant [69]. Our own prior work develops a robust rubric for analyzing error
quality based on subsequent programmer actions [41], and also develops a “static”
criterion that applies precision and recall to evaluating the quality of messages at
design-time [70]. All these ingredients may prove useful to compare error feedback.
One important aspect of benchmarking errors is that the language may have means
to preclude their construction entirely. In a traditional, textual language, one can write
virtually any text string and submit it for analysis. In contrast, structured editors and
block-based editors have a critical property: it is impossible to construct a syntactically
ill-formed program. We will call these preventative programming media. Types can be
considered an extension of this: they are a context-sensitive well-formedness check,
and can thus be incorporated into a preventative editor. The burden then shifts to a
qualitatively diﬀerent kind of phenomenon: from explaining an error that has occurred
(which can reference a concrete program) to explaining why a certain program cannot
be built (which pertains to a set of programs that, by deﬁnition, cannot exist).
8:17


===== PAGE 18 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
We note that there can be a subtle interaction between preventative media and
rich type systems. Block languages, for instance, work well because there are obvious
visual cues showing why one block cannot be placed inside another. However, when
type errors become more subtle—and context-sensitive—preventative methods have
the potential to baﬄe programmers much more than an after-the-fact error report
might [39, 51, 64]. Therefore, this domain presents an interesting case-study in the
creation of richly-typed preventative programming interfaces.
7.3 Conformance
Unlike the Table api, which permits some freedom of implementation, these error
benchmarks are sensitive to small changes. For example, in a sophisticated type
system, inlining code can signiﬁcantly change the detection and, even more so, the
reporting of an error. Thus, any deviations must be carefully documented and justiﬁed.
8
Type System Datasheet Template
github.com/brownplt/B2T2/blob/v1.0/Datasheet.md
Recently, a group of inﬂuential data scientists put forward the notion of datasheets
for datasets [24]. Those authors are directly inspired by a tradition in engineering:
In the electronics industry, every component, no matter how simple or complex,
is accompanied with a datasheet describing its operating characteristics, test
results, recommended usage, and other information.
Datasheets enable engineers to quickly compare similar components and choose ones
ﬁt for purpose. Noting the importance of datasets and their potential for misuse, the
authors present an analogous notion of datasheets for datasets.
Programming languages and type systems would beneﬁt from similar documen-
tation. The goal of such a datasheet is not to preclude innovation or hide novelty or
virtues; rather, on aspects that can be compared, a datasheet provides a quick, standard
way to determine which component can ﬁt a use. Put diﬀerently, the benchmark is an
attempt to systematize the “input” and the datasheet helps systematically summarize
the “output” (i.e., the reporting of the system).
To this end, we accompany b2t2 with a datasheet template for tabular type systems.
The authors of a language that implements b2t2 can ﬁll out the datasheet to help
would-be readers quickly understand the new language.
9
How Not to Use b2t2
As mentioned above (section 2.3), b2t2 is a tool for the normal design of tabular
type systems. We developed the benchmark in response to a lack of focus among
related works—there are many type systems that support tabular programming in a
conventional language, and yet these designs are extremely diﬃcult to evaluate (sec-
8:18


===== PAGE 19 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
tion 10). b2t2 sets a common goal for these type system designs. No matter how
many constraints a particular type system can express, implementing b2t2 relates the
system to the practice of tabular programming as found in widely-used frameworks.
b2t2 is not, however, a suitable goal for all typed tabular languages. Unconventional
programming media may struggle to express aspects of the benchmark. For instance,
one can imagine a virtual reality-based environment in which users can directly
manipulate tables in space; such an environment might have an awkward time with
the Table api even if the environment accommodates the example programs. The
Subtext language [21], as well as Pyret, synthesize types from example. These media
might encode useful constraints without anything resembling traditional code or
types. For such media, it makes sense to ignore parts of b2t2. Therefore, b2t2 should
never be used to criticize such designs, which may need very diﬀerent evaluation
methods (such as cognitive dimensions [8] and concepts [28]).
In short, b2t2 is a structured and technical evaluation criterion. Although there
are many “normal” type systems to which it applies, there may be “slightly abnormal”
designs to which it only partially applies and “radical” designs that are out of scope.
These radical designs are nevertheless vital for progress in programming media.
10
Related Work
Programming with Tables
As noted above (section 2), b2t2 is directly inspired by
tabular programming frameworks. The frameworks include R Tidyverse [19, 59],
Python pandas [42, 57], Julia [31, 32], LINQ [43], and SQL [17, 18]. Each provides a
toolkit for comprehending and manipulating tables. The b2t2 Table api selects vetted
operations from these sources.
The Bootstrap:Data Science [9] and data-centric computing [37, 53] curricula
provide critical validation. First, the teaching materials present basic data science
tasks that should be expressible. Second, learners that have taken these courses
graciously supplied the logs that we used to ﬁnd erroneous programs (section 7).
Types for Tables
There is a huge amount of prior work on type systems that support
tabular programming in some form or another. Because these works pursue diﬀerent
goals and present examples that vary widely in complexity, a direct comparison is
diﬃcult. We hope that b2t2 enables apples-to-apples comparisons in the future. To a
ﬁrst approximation, however, the research targets ﬁve application areas:
Records and Variants Any type system that supports polymorphic records can
support a kind of tabular programming, e.g. [23, 27, 44, 50, 65], though the details
depend on the allowed operations on records. Historically, these systems focus on
decidable type inference and disallow ﬁrst-class labels.
Relational Algebra The authors of LINQ claim that relational algebra is enough
to support programming with a variety of data formats, including tables [43].
Several other languages follow this maxim, including Ferry [26], SML# [10, 46],
and Ur [12].
8:19


===== PAGE 20 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
Array-Oriented Programming Remora is a typed variant of the J programming
language [30, 52]. The multi-dimensional array operations in Remora can likely be
specialized to tabular programming. Qube [61] and FISh [29] might be repurposed
in a similar manner.
Data Exploration The Gamma (thegamma.net) is an innovative language for data
exploration [48]. Programmers import a dataset as an object and type a dot (.)
after the dataset name to see a list of analytical operations. Applying an operation
computes a new type for the result using a pivot type provider [56], which is enabled
by an untyped relational algebra engine. The dot-driven programming model is
compelling, and we are curious to learn the extent to which it can accommodate
other tabular programming idioms.
Fancy Types The designers of advanced type systems occasionally use tabular
programming as an application area to demonstrate expressiveness. Examples
include the constant-propagating types in CompRDL [33] and the reﬁnement types
of Liquid Haskell [62]. Along these lines, we conjecture that the TypeScript keyof
operator [20] can support much of the b2t2 Table api.
Spreadsheet Programming
Spreadsheets are not tables, but type systems that detect
spreadsheet errors might be useful to detect errors in tables [3, 11, 68]. Tabular
programming might also beneﬁt from incorporating some of the more-structured
elements of spreadsheet programming, such as reactive equations. These would,
however, signiﬁcantly complicate the apis.
Language Design Benchmarks
We are aware of a few other benchmarks for aspects
of language design. One is related and complementary to b2t2: an in-progress ex-
pressiveness benchmark [14] that compares several languages and styles of program-
ming on table-processing tasks. The representation design benchmarks [72] identify
static representation problems for visual programming languages. POPLMark [5] and
POPLMark reloaded [1] present problems for proof assistants. Berkeley Motifs [4] set
goals for parallel programming models and architectures. The LWC benchmarks [22]
address various aspects of language workbenches, from notation to code reuse. Finally,
7GUIs [34] presents seven tasks for GUI toolkits to express succinctly.
11
Conclusion
Ultimately, our goal is to improve the practice of tabular programming via static typing.
Rich types have the potential to help all kinds of users; they can oﬀer documentation
for learners, performance hints for experts, and feedback for everyone in between.
The demand for such tooling is high, and we expect it to grow in the coming years.
b2t2 is a ﬁrst step toward this long-term goal, designed to focus our own design
eﬀorts and to promote scientiﬁc discussions with other research teams. It was born
of a frustration: trying to reconcile a large number of diﬀerent papers that each
described exciting advances but that were mutually incomparable. We believe the
components of the benchmark cover the basics of a quality tabular language. First,
8:20


===== PAGE 21 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
we oﬀer a standard deﬁnition that conforms well to real-world tables. Second, the
example tables concretize the deﬁnition. Third, the Table api provides a curated set of
operations to strive for. Fourth, the example programs validate the api and illustrate
additional typing issues. Fifth, the error illustrations draw attention to diagnostics.
Finally, the datasheet template brings these components into a technical summary
that is designed to encourage comparisons.
Benchmarks are normative, however, and we acknowledge the threat posed by
Goodhart’s Law [25]. In brief, the trouble is that “when a measure becomes a target,
it ceases to be a good measure” [55]. That said, two points about b2t2 help to lessen
its potential of becoming a disconnected measure:
1. We begin with a fairly useful set of operations that represent a foundation for
standard table processing. If a language supported only these operations, that
would still provide a comfortable programming basis for many situations, especially
when general-purpose programming tools are also available.
2. We expect that language designers (and data scientists) will be happy to update
our benchmark with examples we have missed, especially—in the spirit of friendly
competition—those they support well, or—in the spirit of scientiﬁc honesty—those
they support poorly.
In sum, we are optimistic that b2t2 will help attract programming language expertise
to the central issues for typed tables. Nevertheless, the cautions of section 9 are critical
and we would be disappointed if this work were used to squelch innovation.
Benchmark Links
GitHub release: github.com/brownplt/B2T2/releases/tag/v1.0
Zenodo archive: doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5507463
Extended paper: cs.brown.edu/research/plt/dl/prog2022-b2t2
Acknowledgements
We thank: the attendees of our Spring 2021 seminar for thought-
ful discussions; Ben Lerner for suggesting the dotProduct example program; Tomas
Petricek for broadening our design discussions; the other reviewers for thoughtful feed-
back; Titus Barik and Brett Becker for references related to error messages; Margaret
Burnett, Will Crichton, Paul Khuong, and Cameron Yick for references to language
design benchmarks; Ranjit Jhala for help with Liquid Haskell as we prototyped b2t2;
and Matthias Felleisen for early criticism that shaped the direction of this work.
This work was partly supported by the US National Science Foundation. This re-
search was also developed with funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) and the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL). The views, opinions
and/or ﬁndings expressed are those of the author and should not be interpreted
as representing the oﬃcial views or policies of the Department of Defense or the
U.S. Government. Greenman received support from NSF grant 2030859 to the CRA
for the CIFellows project.
8:21


===== PAGE 22 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
A
Datasheet
A.1 Reference
Q. What is the URL of the version of the benchmark being used?
Q. On what date was this version of the datasheet last updated?
Q. If you are not using the latest benchmark available on that date, please explain
why not.
A.2 Example Tables
Q. Do tables express heterogeneous data, or must data be homogenized?
Q. Do tables capture missing data and, if so, how?
Q. Are mutable tables supported? Are there any limitations?
You may reference, instead of duplicating, the responses to the above questions in
answering those below:
Q. Which tables are inexpressible? Why?
Q. Which tables are only partially expressible? Why, and what’s missing?
Q. Which tables’ expressibility is unknown? Why?
Q. Which tables can be expressed more precisely than in the benchmark? How?
Q. How direct is the mapping from the tables in the benchmark to representations in
your system? How complex is the encoding?
A.3 TableAPI
Q. Are there consistent changes made to the way the operations are represented?
Q. Which operations are entirely inexpressible? Why?
Q. Which operations are only partially expressible? Why, and what’s missing?
Q. Which operations’ expressibility is unknown? Why?
Q. Which operations can be expressed more precisely than in the benchmark? How?
A.4 Example Programs
Q. Which examples are inexpressible? Why?
Q. Which examples’ expressibility is unknown? Why?
Q. Which examples, or aspects thereof, can be expressed especially precisely? How?
Q. How direct is the mapping from the pseudocode in the benchmark to representa-
tions in your system? How complex is the encoding?
8:22


===== PAGE 23 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
A.5 Errors
There are (at least) two parts to errors: representing the source program that causes
the error, and generating output that explains it. The term “error situation” refers to
a representation of the cause of the error in the program source.
For each error situation it may be that the language:
isn’t expressive enough to capture it
can at least partially express the situation
prevents the program from being constructed
Expressiveness, in turn, can be for multiple artifacts:
the buggy versions of the programs
the correct variants of the programs
the type system’s representation of the constraints
the type system’s reporting of the violation
Q. Which error situations are known to be inexpressible? Why?
Q. Which error situations are only partially expressible? Why, and what’s missing?
Q. Which error situations’ expressibility is unknown? Why?
Q. Which error situations can be expressed more precisely than in the benchmark?
How?
Q. Which error situations are prevented from being constructed? How?
Q. For each error situation that is at least partially expressible, what is the quality of
feedback to the programmer?
Q. For each error situation that is prevented from being constructed, what is the
quality of feedback to the programmer?
8:23


===== PAGE 24 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
References
[1]
Andreas Abel, Guillaume Allais, Aliya Hameer, Brigitte Pientka, Alberto
Momigliano, Steven Schäfer, and Kathrin Stark. “POPLMark reloaded: Mecha-
nizing proofs by logical relations”. In: Journal of Functional Programming 29
(2019), e19. doi: 10.1017/S0956796819000170.
[2]
Leif Andersen, Michael Ballantyne, and Matthias Felleisen. “Adding Interactive
Visual Syntax to Textual Code”. In: PACMPL 4.OOPSLA (2020), 222:1–222:28.
doi: 10.1145/3428290.
[3]
Tudor Antoniu, Paul A. Steckler, Shriram Krishnamurthi, Erich Neuwirth, and
Matthias Felleisen. “Validating the Unit Correctness of Spreadsheet Programs”.
In: ICSE. 2004, pages 439–448. doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2004.1317466.
[4]
Krste Asanovic, Ras Bodik, Bryan Christopher Catanzaro, Joseph James Gebis,
Parry Husbands, Kurt Keutzer, David A. Patterson, William Lester Plishker,
John Shalf, Samuel Webb Williams, and Katherine A. Yellick. The Landscape of
Parallel Computing Research: A View from Berkeley. Technical report UCB/EECS-
2006-183. Accessed 2021-11-07. University of California at Berkeley, 2006. url:
https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2006/EECS-2006-183.pdf.
[5]
Brian E. Aydemir, Aaron Bohannon, Matthew Fairbairn, J. Nathan Foster,
Benjamin C. Pierce, Peter Sewell, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, Geoﬀrey Washburn,
Stephanie Weirich, and Steve Zdancewic. “Mechanized Metatheory for the
Masses: The PoplMark Challenge”. In: Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics.
2005, pages 50–65. doi: 10.1007/11541868_4.
[6]
Titus Barik, Chris Parnin, and Emerson Murphy–Hill. “One λ at a time: What
do we know about presenting human-friendly output from a program analysis
tool?” In: PLATEAU. Accessed 2021-11-07. 2017. url: https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2020/03/tbarik-lambda-plateau2017.pdf.
[7]
Brett A. Becker, Paul Denny, Raymond Pettit, Durell Bouchard, Dennis J. Bou-
vier, Brian Harrington, Amir Kamil, Amey Karkare, Chris McDonald, Peter-
Michael Osera, Janice L. Pearce, and James Prather. “Compiler Error Mes-
sages Considered Unhelpful: The Landscape of Text-Based Programming Error
Message Research”. In: Proceedings of the Working Group Reports on Innova-
tion and Technology in Computer Science Education. 2019, pages 177–210. doi:
10.1145/3344429.3372508.
[8]
Alan F. Blackwell and Thomas R. G. Green. “Notational Systems – the Cognitive
Dimensions of Notations framework”. In: HCI Models, Theories, and Frameworks:
Toward a Multidisciplinary Science. 2003, pages 103–134. doi: 10.1016/B978-
155860808-5/50005-8.
[9]
Bootstrap Community. Bootstrap:Data Science. Accessed 2021-05-26. url: https:
//www.bootstrapworld.org/materials/data-science/.
[10]
Peter Buneman and Atsushi Ohori. “Polymorphism and Type Inference in
Database Programming”. In: ACM Transactions on Database Systems 21.1 (1996),
pages 30–76. doi: 10.1145/227604.227609.
8:24


===== PAGE 25 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
[11]
Chris Chambers and Martin Erwig. “Reasoning about spreadsheets with labels
and dimensions”. In: Journal of Visual Languages & Computing 21.5 (2010),
pages 249–262. doi: 10.1016/j.jvlc.2009.04.002.
[12]
Adam Chlipala. “Ur: statically-typed metaprogramming with type-level record
computation”. In: PLDI. 2010, pages 122–133. doi: 10.1145/1806596.1806612.
[13]
E. F. Codd. The Relational Model for Database Management, Version 2. Addison-
Wesley, 1990. isbn: 9780201141924.
[14]
Will Crichton, Scott Kovach, and Gleb Shevchuk. Expressiveness Benchmark.
Accessed 2021-09-12. url: https://willcrichton.net/expressiveness-benchmark.
[15]
C. J. Date. Relational database writings: 1985-1989. Addison-Wesley, 1990. isbn:
0201508818.
[16]
LINQ developers. Enumerable.Aggregate Method. Accessed 2021-05-26. url:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.
aggregate?view=net-5.0.
[17]
MySQL developers. MySQL 8.0 Reference Manual. Accessed 2021-05-26. url:
https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/.
[18]
Postgres developers. Postgres 13.3 Documentation. Accessed 2021-05-28. url:
https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/index.html.
[19]
R Developers. R: The R Project for Statistical Computing. Accessed 2021-05-26.
url: https://www.r-project.org.
[20]
TypeScript Developers. Keyof Type Operator. Accessed 2021-05-25. url: https:
//www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/keyof-types.html.
[21]
Jonathan Edwards. Subtext: Uncovering the Simplicity of Programming. Accessed
2021-08-25. url: http://www.subtext-lang.org.
[22]
Sebastian Erdweg, Tijs van der Storm, Markus Völter, Laurence Tratt, Remi
Bosman, William R. Cook, Albert Gerritsen, Angelo Hulshout, Steven Kelly, Alex
Loh, Gabriël D. P. Konat, Pedro J. Molina, Martin Palatnik, Risto Pohjonen, Eu-
gen Schindler, Klemens Schindler, Riccardo Solmi, Vlad A. Vergu, Eelco Visser,
Kevin van der Vlist, Guido Wachsmuth, and Jimi van der Woning. “Evaluating
and comparing language workbenches: Existing results and benchmarks for the
future”. In: Computer Languages, Systems & Structures 44 (2015), pages 24–47.
doi: 10.1016/j.cl.2015.08.007.
[23]
Benedict R. Gaster. “Records, variants and qualiﬁed types”. Accessed 2021-08-
31. PhD thesis. University of Nottingham, UK, 1998. url: http://ethos.bl.uk/
OrderDetails.do?uin=uk.bl.ethos.262959.
[24]
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman
Vaughan, Hanna M. Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. “Datasheets
for Datasets”. In: CoRR abs/1803.09010 (2018). Accessed 2021-11-07. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1803.09010.
8:25


===== PAGE 26 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
[25]
Charles A. E. Goodhart. “Problems of Monetary Management: The UK Experi-
ence”. In: Monetary Theory and Practice: The UK Experience. 1984, pages 91–121.
isbn: 978-1-349-17295-5.
[26]
Torsten Grust, Manuel Mayr, Jan Rittinger, and Tom Schreiber. “FERRY:
database-supported program execution”. In: SIGMOD. 2009, pages 1063–1066.
doi: 10.1145/1559845.1559982.
[27]
Robert Harper and Benjamin C. Pierce. “A Record Calculus Based on Symmetric
Concatenation”. In: POPL. 1991, pages 131–142. doi: 10.1145/99583.99603.
[28]
Daniel Jackson. “Towards a theory of conceptual design for software”. In:
Onward! 2015, pages 282–296. doi: 10.1145/2814228.2814248.
[29]
C. B. Jay. The FISh language deﬁnition. Technical report. Accessed 2021-11-07.
University of Technology, Sydney, 1998. url: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.37.556.
[30]
Jsoftware, Inc. The J Programming Language. Accessed 2021-05-25. url: https:
//www.jsoftware.com.
[31]
JuliaData. DataFrames.jl. Accessed 2021-05-15. url: https://github.com/JuliaDa
ta/DataFrames.jl.
[32]
JuliaData. DataTables.jl. Accessed 2021-05-15. url: https://github.com/JuliaDat
a/DataTables.jl.
[33]
Milod Kazerounian, Sankha Narayan Guria, Niki Vazou, Jeﬀrey S. Foster, and
David Van Horn. “Type-level computations for Ruby libraries”. In: PLDI. 2019,
pages 966–979. doi: 10.1145/3314221.3314630.
[34]
Eugen Kiss. 7GUIs: A GUI Programming Benchmark. Accessed 2021-09-12. url:
https://eugenkiss.github.io/7guis/more.
[35]
Paul Klint, Tijs van der Storm, and Jurgen J. Vinju. “RASCAL: A Domain Speciﬁc
Language for Source Code Analysis and Manipulation”. In: IEEE International
Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation. 2009, pages 168–
177. doi: 10.1109/SCAM.2009.28.
[36]
Cliﬀord Konold, William Finzer, and Kosoom Kreetong. “Modeling as a Core
Component of Structuring Data”. In: Statistics Education Research Journal 16.2
(2017). Accessed 2021-11-07. url: http://iase- web.org/documents/SERJ/
SERJ16(2)_Konold.pdf.
[37]
Shriram Krishnamurthi and Kathi Fisler. “Data-Centricity: A Challenge and
Opportunity for Computing Education”. In: Communications of the ACM 63.8
(2020), pages 24–26. doi: 10.1145/3408056.
[38]
John Launchbury and Simon L. Peyton Jones. “State in Haskell”. In: LISP and
Symbolic Computation 8.4 (1995), pages 293–341. doi: 10.1007/BF01018827.
[39]
Benjamin S. Lerner, Matthew Flower, Dan Grossman, and Craig Chambers.
“Searching for type-error messages”. In: PLDI. 2007, pages 425–434. doi: 10.
1145/1250734.1250783.
8:26


===== PAGE 27 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
[40]
John H. Maloney, Mitchel Resnick, Natalie Rusk, Brian Silverman, and Evelyn
Eastmond. “The Scratch Programming Language and Environment”. In: ACM
Transactions on Computing Education 10.4 (2010), 16:1–16:15. doi: 10.1145/
1868358.1868363.
[41]
Guillaume Marceau, Kathi Fisler, and Shriram Krishnamurthi. “Measuring
the Eﬀectiveness of Error Messages Designed for Novice Programmers”. In:
Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education. 2011, pages 499–504. doi:
10.1145/1953163.1953308.
[42]
Wes McKinney. “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python”. In:
Python in Science Conference. 2010, pages 56–61. doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-
00a.
[43]
Erik Meijer. “The World According to LINQ”. In: Communications of the ACM
54.10 (2011), pages 45–51. doi: 10.1145/2001269.2001285.
[44]
J. Garrett Morris and James McKinna. “Abstracting extensible data types:
or, rows by any other name”. In: PACMPL 3.POPL (2019), 12:1–12:28. doi:
10.1145/3290325.
[45]
Marion R. Morrissett. “Missing Data in the Relational Model”. PhD thesis.
University of Virginia, 2013. doi: 10.25772/3BBD-CZ71.
[46]
Atsushi Ohori and Katsuhiro Ueno. “Making standard ML a practical database
programming language”. In: ICFP. 2011, pages 307–319. doi: 10.1145/2034773.
2034815.
[47]
Cyrus Omar, Ian Voysey, Ravi Chugh, and Matthew A. Hammer. “Live Func-
tional Programming with Typed Holes”. In: PACMPL 3.POPL (2019), 14:1–14:32.
doi: 10.1145/3290327.
[48]
Tomas Petricek. “Data Exploration through Dot-driven Development”. In:
ECOOP. 2017, 21:1–21:27. doi: 10.4230/LIPIcs.ECOOP.2017.21.
[49]
Tomas Petricek. “Foundations of a Live Data Exploration Environment”. In: The
Art, Science, and Engineering of Programming 4.3(8) (2020), pages 1–37. doi:
10.22152/programming-journal.org/2020/4/8.
[50]
Didier Rémy. “Typechecking Records and Variants in a Natural Extension of
ML”. In: POPL. 1989, pages 77–88. doi: 10.1145/75277.75284.
[51]
Eric L. Seidel, Ranjit Jhala, and Westley Weimer. “Dynamic Witnesses for
Static Type Errors (or, Ill-Typed Programs Usually Go Wrong)”. In: Journal of
Functional Programming 28 (2018), e13. doi: 10.1017/S0956796818000126.
[52]
Justin Slepak, Olin Shivers, and Panagiotis Manolios. “An Array-Oriented Lan-
guage with Static Rank Polymorphism”. In: ESOP. 2014, pages 27–46. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-54833-8_3.
[53]
Brown CS111 course staﬀ. CSCI 0111 Computing Foundations: Data. Accessed
2021-05-26. url: https://cs.brown.edu/courses/csci0111/.
8:27


===== PAGE 28 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
[54]
Charles Maurice Stebbins and Mary H. Coolidge. Golden Treasury Readers:
Primer. Illustrator Unknown. American Book Co., 1909. url: https://archive.
org/details/goldentreasuryr10coolgoog.
[55]
Marilyn Strathern. “‘Improving ratings’: audit in the British University system”.
In: European review 5.3 (1997), pages 305–321. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1234-981X
(199707)5:3<305::AID-EURO184>3.0.CO;2-4.
[56]
Don Syme, Keith Battocchi, Kenji Takeda, Donna Malayeri, and Tomas Petricek.
“Themes in information-rich functional programming for internet-scale data
sources”. In: Workshop on Data Driven Functional Programming. 2013, pages 1–4.
doi: 10.1145/2429376.2429378.
[57]
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest.
Accessed 2021-08-31. Feb. 2020. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[58]
Tim Teitelbaum and Thomas W. Reps. “The Cornell Program Synthesizer: A
Syntax-Directed Programming Environment”. In: Communications of the ACM
24.9 (1981), pages 563–573. doi: 10.1145/358746.358755.
[59]
Tidyverse. Tidyverse: R packages for data science. Accessed 2021-05-26. url:
https://www.tidyverse.org.
[60]
V. Javier Traver. “On Compiler Error Messages: What They Say and What They
Mean”. In: Advances in Human–Computer Interaction 2010 (2010), 602570:1–
602570:26. doi: 10.1155/2010/602570.
[61]
Kai Trojahner and Clemens Grelck. “Dependently typed array programs don’t go
wrong”. In: Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming 78.7 (2009), pages 643–
664. doi: 10.1016/j.jlap.2009.03.002.
[62]
Niki Vazou, Alexander Bakst, and Ranjit Jhala. “Bounded reﬁnement types”.
In: ICFP. 2015, pages 48–61. doi: 10.1145/2784731.2784745.
[63]
Walter G. Vincenti. What Engineers Know and How They Know It. John Hopkins
University Press, 1993. isbn: 0801845882.
[64]
Mitchell Wand. “Finding the Source of Type Errors”. In: POPL. 1986, pages 38–
43. doi: 10.1145/512644.512648.
[65]
Mitchell Wand. “Type Inference for Record Concatenation and Multiple In-
heritance”. In: Information and Computation 93.1 (1991), pages 1–15. doi:
10.1016/0890-5401(91)90050-C.
[66]
Hadley Wickham. Advanced R. 2nd edition. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2014. isbn:
0815384572.
[67]
Hadley Wickham. “Tidy Data”. In: Journal of Statistical Software 59.1 (2014),
pages 1–23. doi: 10.18637/jss.v059.i10.
[68]
Jack Williams, Carina Negreanu, Andrew D. Gordon, and Advait Sarkar. “Under-
standing and Inferring Units in Spreadsheets”. In: Visual Languages and Human
Centric Computing. 2020, pages 1–9. doi: 10.1109/VL/HCC50065.2020.9127254.
8:28


===== PAGE 29 =====
Kuang-Chen Lu, Ben Greenman, and Shriram Krishnamurthi
[69]
Michael S. Wogalter, Vincent C. Conzola, and Tonya L. Smith-Jackson.
“Research-based guidelines for warning design and evaluation”. In: Applied
Ergonomics 33 (2002). doi: 10.1016/S0003-6870(02)00009-1.
[70]
John Wrenn and Shriram Krishnamurthi. “Error Messages Are Classiﬁers: A
Process to Design and Evaluate Error Messages”. In: Onward! 2017, pages 134–
147. doi: 10.1145/3133850.3133862.
[71]
xkcd. Signiﬁcant. Accessed 2021-05-13. url: https://xkcd.com/882.
[72]
Sherry Yang, Margaret M. Burnett, Elyon DeKoven, and Moshé M. Zloof. “Rep-
resentation Design Benchmarks: A Design-Time Aid for VPL Navigable Static
Representations”. In: Journal of Visual Languages & Computing 8.5-6 (1997),
pages 563–599. doi: 10.1006/jvlc.1997.0047.
8:29


===== PAGE 30 =====
Types for Tables: A Language Design Benchmark
About the authors
Kuang-Chen Lu (LuKuangchen1024@gmail.com) is a PhD student
at Brown University.
Ben Greenman (benjamin.l.greenman@gmail.com) is a PLT mem-
ber and a postdoc at Brown University.
Shriram Krishnamurthi (shriram@brown.edu) is the Vice Presi-
dent of Programming Languages (no, not really) at Brown Univer-
sity.
8:30
